[blog] New article for the date pickers migration to X (#31831)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/lab-pickers-to-mui-x.md

---

> title: The date pickers are now part of the Advanced components

Author: Yeah the current title is very factual, not catchy at all

> title: The date pickers are now part of the Advanced components

Reviewer: What details deserve to be highlighted in the title and description? 

I think the most interesting thing we could convey to the reader is "these components are going to become more powerful and sophisticated now that they're a part of MUI X."

In other words, you will have even more powerful tools at your disposal if you opt for MUI X and/or the Pro plan.

Ultimately, we want to persuade developers to try MUI X and purchase a commercial license. So we need to use the headline and description to present the primary value proposition.

I'm not in love with this suggestion—it's centered on "us" rather than the reader—but I think it's at least a step in the right direction.

```suggestion
title: MUI X expands its product line with advanced date and time picker components
```

> title: The date pickers are now part of the Advanced components

Author: I'm putting this title
If somebody have ideas to improve it

description: XXXX
date: 2022-04-03T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['flaviendelangle']
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
---

We're excited to announce that, after more than 18 month in the lab, the date picker components are now part of the X packages.

> 

Reviewer: I think this is worth explaining. Sources: [Date Picker](https://www.designencyclopedia.io/element/date-picker), [A hunt for the perfect date picker UI](https://uxdesign.cc/date-picker-design-5c5ef8f35286)

```suggestion

## What is a date picker?

A date picker is an interface control that enables the user to select a date from a menu.

Common design patterns include text inputs, dropdown lists, calendars, timelines, and scrolling pickers on mobile devices. 
The user may need to select an individual date, or a range of dates.

```

## What is MUI X ?

Since its creation, MUI have always kept at heart to provide great components for free.

> However, some projects require several full-time developers and can not be sustainable relying only on open-source income.
> To be able to keep improving our products, including the open source one, we decided in 2020 to launch the _Advanced components_, a new set of components available under two licenses:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, some _Advanced components_ such as date pickers require several full-time developers and can not be sustainable relying only on open-source income.
To be able to keep improving the library and add _Advanced components_ without compromise on code quality, we decided in 2020 to launch MUI X, a new set of components available under two licenses:
```

- MUI X: the MIT licensed, free to use version
- MUI X Pro: the commercially licensed version with the most advanced features

The Advanced component launched by our team have been the Data Grid, with the `@mui/x-data-grid` and `@mui/x-data-grid-pro` packages.
More than one year later, this new source of income has allowed our company to hire several new developers and to increase the amount of work achieved, even on the open-source team.

> ## Why move the date pickers to MUI

Reviewer 2: I assume you mean
```suggestion
## Why move the date pickers to MUI X
```

But the question you answer below is
```suggestion
## Will I have to pay?
```

Author: I think this section could have some additional contain about why is the picker a good candidate for X.

> Since its creation, MUI have always kept at heart to provide great components for free.
> However, some _Advanced components_ such as date pickers require several full-time developers and can not be sustainable relying only on open-source income.
> To be able to keep improving the library and add _Advanced components_ without compromise on code quality, we decided in 2020 to launch MUI X, a new set of components available under two licenses:
> 
> - MUI X: the MIT licensed, free to use version
> - MUI X Pro: the commercially licensed version with the most advanced features
> 
> The Advanced component launched by our team have been the Data Grid, with the `@mui/x-data-grid` and `@mui/x-data-grid-pro` packages.
> More than one year later, this new source of income has allowed our company to hire several new developers and to increase the amount of work achieved, even on the open-source team.

Reviewer: Is it really necessary to explain the full backstory of MUI X before getting to the main story? I think two or three sentences would be plenty.

```suggestion
MUI X is a collection of advanced components built for complex use cases.

As opposed to our Core library, which leans on the open-source community for support, MUI X components require several full-time developers dedicated to engineering and ongoing maintenance.

MUI X components are available under two licenses:

- MUI X—MIT license; free to use
- MUI X Pro—commercial license; includes the most advanced features
```

Author: > Is it really necessary to explain the full backstory of MUI X before getting to the main story? I think two or three sentences would be plenty.

In your new phrasing, we just loose the information that the Date Picker is not the 1st attempt of Advanced components and that for the Data Grid it was a success in term of feature.
And that financially it also works, which is good for the user because we re-invest a good chunk of these incomes in open source development time. 

My whole blog post is here to explain that the migration is worth it for all users.

> When the date pickers components have moved to the lab, it was already clear that some of their features would eventually be part of the commercially licensed packages.

Reviewer: Let's elaborate on why the decision was made, and why it matters to the reader/user.

```suggestion
Date picker UI elements appear simple enough on the surface, but they are surprisingly complicated to engineer.

When our date picker components were ready to leave our experimental lab, we had a choice to make: would they live in the MUI Core library, or should they become a part of MUI X?

Given the complex nature of these components, we decided that they would benefit most from the dedicated attention that they would receive from the X team.

And by offering an even more advanced component package through our commercial license, we can continue to grow our team to better serve your needs.
```

> We just released two new packages:

Reviewer: Rephrasing to make it more evergreen.

```suggestion
Our date picker components are now available in two packages:
```

- `@mui/x-date-pickers` which contains all the MIT licensed components
- `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro` which contains all the MIT and commercially licensed components

> > ⚠️The only components that we are moving to a commercial license are the date range components.
> > Those had a clear warning on the doc stating that they were intended for MUI X Pro.
> > All the rest of the components are available in `@mui/x-date-pickers` and will stay MIT and free forever.

Reviewer: Instead of a warning here, I think this should be a section that explains which components are in the Pro package.

```suggestion
## Which components are only available in the Pro package?

The date range components can only be used with a commercial license.

All other date picker components are available in `mui/x-date-pickers` and will remain MIT licensed and free forever.
```

> 

Reviewer: This could also go at the end of the piece. But given the flow of the piece I think it makes the most sense here. Some users will need to purchase a license before migrating.

```suggestion

## How do I purchase a commercial license?

Visit [the MUI Store](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/) to purchase a commercial license.

```

## How do I migrate ?

> We tried to keep this migration as easy as possible.
> The only changes are the name of the package and a migration from default export to named export.

Reviewer: The reader doesn't care what we tried to do. :)

```suggestion
To migrate, update the package name and change from a default export to a named export:
```

```ts
// before
import DatePicker from '@mui/lab/DatePicker';
import DateRangePicker from '@mui/lab/DateRangePicker';
import { DatePicker, DateRangePicker } from '@mui/lab';

// after
import DatePicker from '@mui/x-pickers/DatePicker';
import DateRangePicker from '@mui/x-pickers-pro/DateRangePicker';
import { DatePicker } from '@mui/x-pickers'; // DatePicker is also available in `@mui/x-pickers-pro`
import { DateRangePicker } from '@mui/x-pickers-pro';
```

We have prepared a codemod to help you migrate your codebase from `@mui/lab` to `@mui/x-date-pickers` or `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro`.

```shell
npx @mui/codemod v5.0.0/date-pickers-moved-to-x <path>
```

> 

Reviewer: This link doesn't appear to exist at the moment but I grabbed it from [this PR](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/31810) so I'm assuming that's where the docs for this will be eventually.

```suggestion

## Where is the date picker documentation?

You can find documentation on the date picker components in the [MUI X docs](mui.com/docs/x/react-date-pickers/).

```

## What's next for the date pickers ?

For now, `@mui/x-pickers` and `@mui/x-pickers-pro` are in alpha.

> Our next goal is to work on the stability and api consistency of those components, in order to prepare a stable release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our next goal is to work on the stability and API consistency of these components to prepare a stable release.
```

---
title: MUI X expands its product line with advanced date and time picker components

> description: XXXX

Reviewer: How about something like this?

```suggestion
description: Migrate to the new package to start building with our powerful date and time pickers, now part of MUI X.
```

date: 2022-04-03T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['flaviendelangle']
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
---

> After more than 18 months in our experimental lab, the date and time picker components have found a new home as part of MUI X.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After more than 18 months in the lab, the date and time picker components have found a new home as part of MUI X.
```

This means we'll be dedicating even more time and effort to these complex components, to better meet the needs of both you and your users.

## What are date and time pickers?

Date and time pickers are interface controls that enable the user to select a date (or time) from a menu.

Common design patterns include text inputs, dropdown lists, calendars, timelines, and scrolling pickers on mobile devices.

The user may need to select an individual date/time, or a range.

## What is MUI X?

MUI X is a collection of advanced components built for complex use cases.

> As opposed to our Core library, which leans on the open-source community for support, MUI X components require several full-time developers dedicated to engineering and ongoing maintenance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As opposed to the Core library, which leans on the open-source community for support, MUI X components require several full-time developers dedicated to engineering and ongoing maintenance.
```

MUI X components are available under two licenses:

> - MUI X—MIT license; free to use

Reviewer 3: The hyphenation in these two bullets looks odd. Perhaps it looks better when the markdown is rendered? (There's no deploy preview so couldn't check.)

```suggestion
- MUI X is MIT licensed, so free to use.
```

> - MUI X Pro—commercial license; includes the most advanced features

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- MUI X Pro, which includes the most advanced features, is commercially licensed.
```

> - MUI X Pro—commercial license; includes the most advanced features.

Reviewer 3: We now seem to have a mix and match of the two different wordings.

```suggestion
- MUI X Pro includes the most advanced features, and is commercially licensed.
```

```suggestion
- MUI X Pro  is commercially licensed, and includes the most advanced features.
```

Author: I went for the 1st one, to keep the appealing part first

## Why have the date and time pickers been moved to MUI X?

Date and time picker UI elements appear simple enough on the surface, but they are surprisingly complicated to engineer.

> When our picker components were ready to leave our experimental lab, we had a choice to make: would they live in the MUI Core library, or should they become a part of MUI X?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the picker components were ready to leave the lab, we had a choice to make: would they live in the MUI Core library, or should they become a part of MUI X?
```

Given the complex nature of these components, we decided that they would benefit most from the dedicated attention that they would receive from the X team.

And by offering an even more advanced component package through our commercial license, we can continue to grow our team to better serve your needs.

> Our date and time picker components are now available in two packages:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The date and time picker components are now available in two packages:
```

- `@mui/x-date-pickers` which contains all the MIT licensed components
- `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro` which contains all the MIT and commercially licensed components

## Which components are only available in the Pro package?

The date range components can only be used with a commercial license.

All other date and time picker components are available in `mui/x-date-pickers` and will remain MIT licensed and free forever.

## How do I purchase a commercial license?

Visit [the MUI Store](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/) to purchase a commercial license.

## How do I migrate?

To migrate, update the package name and change from a default export to a named export:

```ts
// before
import DatePicker from '@mui/lab/DatePicker';
import DateRangePicker from '@mui/lab/DateRangePicker';
import { DatePicker, DateRangePicker } from '@mui/lab';

// after
import DatePicker from '@mui/x-pickers/DatePicker';
import DateRangePicker from '@mui/x-pickers-pro/DateRangePicker';
import { DatePicker } from '@mui/x-pickers'; // DatePicker is also available in `@mui/x-pickers-pro`

> import { DateRangePicker } from '@mui/x-pickers-pro';

Reviewer 4: If yes, I can create a fix

> import { DateRangePicker } from '@mui/x-pickers-pro';

Author: Which one ?

> import { DateRangePicker } from '@mui/x-pickers-pro';

Reviewer 4: `@mui/x-pickers` should be `@mui/x-date-pickers`?

```

> We have prepared a codemod to help you migrate your codebase from `@mui/lab` to `@mui/x-date-pickers` or `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have prepared a codemod to help you migrate your codebase from `@mui/lab` to `@mui/x-date-pickers` or `@mui/x-date-pickers-pro`:
```

```shell
npx @mui/codemod v5.0.0/date-pickers-moved-to-x <path>
```

> ## Where is the date picker documentation?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Where is the date and time picker documentation?
```

> You can find documentation on the date picker components in the [MUI X docs](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find documentation on the picker components in the [MUI X docs](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/).
```

> ## What's next for the date pickers?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's next for the date and time pickers?
```

> You can find documentation on the picker components in the [MUI X docs](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can find the documentation for the picker components in the [MUI X docs](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/).
```
